Semi-formal specification for method resolution (#13961)
enso-org/enso: docs/types/dynamic-dispatch.md

When invoking a method on _module object_ its _module static methods_ take
precedence over _instance methods_ defined on `Any`. Thus a module serves
primarily as a _container for module (static) methods_.

## Method Resolution

**Terminology**:

- **eigen type** of a type `My_Type` is a type of type, usually written as
  `My_Type.type`.

>   - Every type has an eigen type.

Reviewer: #### Observation

- there is always exactly one object being an instance of each eigen (own, vlastní) type
- module, type have each their own eigen type
- singleton type is its own eigen type

Author: Added in d841f70df14bd33d05ec46e9243954fd44c269f0

  - Symbol table maps symbols to their definitions.
  - All definitions are methods.
    - Atom constructors are methods.
    - Atom fields are methods. More specifically, every atom field has an
      associated getter method.

This section describes the _method resolution_ process, which resolves a
concrete method definition for a concrete call site. For a method call
expression `Receiver.symbol`, this section focuses only on a single dispatch
based on `Receiver` argument. For multiple dispatch, see the
[Multiple Dispatch](#multiple-dispatch) section.

Method resolution algorithm for `Receiver.symbol` first determines the _type_ of
the `Receiver`, and then finds the method definition in its _symbol table_:

1. **Determine the type of `Receiver`:**

- 1.1. If `Receiver` is type, the result will be _eigen type_
- 1.2. If `Receiver` is a value (instance / atom), the result will be the _type
  of the value_
- 1.3. If `Receiver` is a module, the result will be the _associated type_ for
  the module
- 1.4. If `Receiver` is a polyglot object, method resolution and invocation will
  be handled according to the [polyglot interoperability](../polyglot/README.md)
  rules.

>   - Polyglot object can be:

Reviewer: - This enumeration probably belongs to `../polyglot/README.md`
- e.g. no need to explain how to obtain polyglot object in this document
- reference to the other document would be more appropriate

Author: Improved in 8f7d18e3370d0ab9abb5ff3a76ed4b33bf764638. Added a reference to the polyglot section.

    - A Java class, imported by `polyglot java import ...` statement.
    - Java object instance, created by `Java_Class.new ...` expression.
    - Javascript, Python, or any other allowed foreign language object returned
      by a foreign method call.
- 1.5. If there is no `Receiver`, we are just looking for a variable in the
  current lexical scope or any parent scopes. See
  [Lexical scope lookup](#lexical-scope-lookup).

2. **Look up symbol in the symbol table of the determined type:**

- 2.1. If `symbol` is defined in the table, select it and stop.

> - 2.2. If parent type is present, repeat the process with the parent type.

Reviewer: - This is the first time you are using "parent type"
- there is no previous definition 
- maybe you want to expand the "terminology section"
- or create another "Reminiscence of OOP terminology" section

Author: Terminology for parent type and builtin type added in c6b9a3eaf5eec71d7e6f948704ada8000cde0915

>   - Every type has an implicit parent type `Any`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - There is a special type called `Any` at the root of "class hierarchy"
  - Every type has an implicit parent type `Any`.
```

Author: Already explained in the terminology now.

>   - Except for `Number` which is a special builtin case with a deeper hierarchy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Except for builtin types `Float` and `Integer` 
     - their parent type is `Number` builtin type
     - e.g. numbers are forming a special case with a deeper hierarchy.
```

  - `Any` has no parent type.

> - 2.2. No parent type is present. Raise `No_Such_Method` panic and stop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 2.2. No parent type is present. Raise `No_Such_Method` panic and terminate.
```

### Lexical scope lookup

> - If `symbol` is defined in the current lexical scope, select it and stop.

Reviewer: - This is not really a "dynamic dispatch"
- but it is an interesting topic
- and complicated - e.g. term like _all transitively imported modules_ sounds scary
- I'd move it to its own _"lexical dispatch"_ document

- Iterate parent scopes: from the current lexical scope, up until this module
  scope. If `symbol` is defined in the scope, select it and stop.
- Look for the `symbol` in all transitively imported modules (in DFS?). If
  `symbol` is defined in any of the modules, select it and stop.
- Raise `Name_Not_Found` panic and stop.

## Method evaluation

This section describes the _method evaluation_ process. We assume that a
particular method definition was already selected by the
[method resolution](#method-resolution) process.

Let's have `method` be a method definition resolved from
[Method Resolution](#method-resolution) process, that is defined as
`method [self] [parName=[defaultValue]]* = <body expression>`.

> If `self` parameter is specified, we call it an _instance method_, otherwise, we

Reviewer: - I'd say this is wrong:
- `self` argument is always the first argument of each method
- at least for _each method_ that can be found in a _lookup table_ of a type
- this is an important step towards #11686

Author: > self argument is always the first argument of each method

It is, but from the engine perspective. From the engine perspective, every method has either a single `self` argument, or two `self` arguments. However, from the language perspective, you cannot declare `self` argument on, for example, module methods, neither can you specify `self` argument when you call such methods.

Reviewer: > two `self` arguments

- I don't understand why should there be two `self` arguments?
   - I heard about _type of self_ and `self` itself - I am not sure what that would be good for?
- I don't even know when has a method two such arguments?

> neither can you specify self argument when you call such module methods.

That would have little sense. `self` argument is type checked and there is only a singleton of a module associated type. E.g. specifying any other `self` to a module method would have to yield `Type_Error`.

Author: Closing as outdated.

call it a _static method_.

### Instance method call evaluation

The method call expression in the format of `obj.method [[argName=]argValue]*`,

> where `obj` is an instance (value / atom) of type `T`, and `method` is an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
where `obj` has type `T`, and `method` is an
```
this works for all types. Not just `Atom` instances.

Author: This whole section was reworded in 7590715c30731b5ea6002fb2768081e5cd5ea0f8. Resolving this comment as outdated.

_instance method_ with `self` argument defined either on `T` or outside `T` as
an _extension method_, the method evaluation process is as follows:

> - `self` argument cannot be specified explicitly

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `self` argument is set to `obj`by implicitly specifying`self=obj`
- possibly `self` could be overridden!? by explicitly specifying `self=xyz`
```

Author: Removed in 7590715c30731b5ea6002fb2768081e5cd5ea0f8

> - Go to [Arguments evaluation](#argument-evaluation) to evaluate `argValue`s and

Reviewer: - argument evaluation is an interesting and rich topic
- we don't have problems with it
- we should just reference some other document or `CurryNode` code(?)
- rather than trying to define it here - that would blow the scope of this PR up tremendously

Author: argument evaluation section removed in 497f2ab526e944a9594bc9d6b719c2646c54c822

  bind them to `argName`s.

> ### Static method call evaluation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Static Method Invocation
```

The method call expression in the format of
`TypeOrModule.method [[argName=]argValue]*`, where `TypeOrModule` is either a

> type or a module, and `method` is a _static method_ defined on `TypeOrModule`.

Reviewer: - there are no static methods
- there are just "types (and eigen types) with their tables of methods"

Author: This whole section was completely reworded in 7590715c30731b5ea6002fb2768081e5cd5ea0f8. This comment is now outdated.

Note that `TypeOrModule` does not have to be specified, if `method` is directly
imported.

> The method evaluation process is as follows:
> 
> 1. **Determine whether `TypeOrModule` is a type or a module:**
> 
>    - 1.1. If `TypeOrModule` is not `Any`, go to 2
>    - 1.2. If `TypeOrModule` is `Any`, go to 4
> 
> 2. **`TypeOrModule` is not `Any`:**
> 
>    - 2.1. If `self` argument is specified explicitly, go to 3. `self` argument
>      value is either:
>      - Passed via `self` named argument.
>      - First positional argument.
>    - 2.2. If `self` argument is not specified explicitly, go to 4.
> 
> 3. **`self` is specified explicitly:**
> 
>    - 3.1. `self` argument is specified explicitly.
>    - 3.2. Bind `self` argument to the provided value.
>    - 3.3. Go to [Arguments evaluation](#argument-evaluation) to evaluate rest of
>      the arguments.
> 
> 4. **`self` is not specified explicitly:**
> 
>    - 4.1. `self` argument is not specified explicitly. This can happen only if
>      there are no arguments. Which results in a method reference.
> 
> 5. **`TypeOrModule` is `Any`:**
>    - 5.1. TODO ...

Reviewer: We should try to reformulate this...
```suggestion
```

- should (instance) method dispatch fail without finding a "symbol" of the method
- consider _Static Invocation Syntax_:

### Static Invocation Syntax

- if the receiver is type
- search its (_not its eigen type_!) chain of method table for a match
- if a method is found
- invoke it _without self_ argument bound to anything

Author: Reformulated according to the algorithm specified in https://github.com/enso-org/enso/pull/13962#pullrequestreview-3287447276 in 7590715c30731b5ea6002fb2768081e5cd5ea0f8

When invoking a method on _module object_ its _module static methods_ take
precedence over _instance methods_ defined on `Any`. Thus a module serves
primarily as a _container for module (static) methods_.

## Method Resolution

This section describes the _method resolution_ process, which resolves a
concrete method definition for a concrete call site. For a method call
expression `Receiver.symbol`, this section focuses only on a single dispatch
based on `Receiver` argument. For multiple dispatch, see the
[Multiple Dispatch](#multiple-dispatch) section.

Method resolution algorithm for `Receiver.symbol`:

1. **Determine the kind of `Receiver`:**

   - 1.1. If `Receiver` is a type (type object), go to step 2.
   - 1.2. If `Receiver` is a value (instance / atom), go to step 3.
   - 1.3. If `Receiver` is a module, go to step 4.
   - 1.4. If `Receiver` is a polyglot object, go to step 5.
   - 1.5. If there is no `Receiver`, go to step 6.

> 2. **`Receiver` is a type. This call site is a _static method call_:**

Reviewer: To play devil's advocate: 
- Isn't it all a bit different?
- The 1st step is to find a `Type` for the receiver
   - for `Atom` the type is its constructor defining type
   - for module the type is its associated type
   - for a `Type` it is its _eigen type_
   - etc.?
- then lookup the method in the _pool_ of that type or
   - its `getSupertype` pool and so on
- if a method is found, invoke it with `self` being set to the receiver
- 00577f7c96 documents/tests the _chain of types_ and shows how we want to use `allTypes` method
- if no such a method is found, consider _static invocation of instance method_!?

_and somewhere here my thoughts dry out..._

Reviewer: > _and somewhere here my thoughts dry out..._
> * [00577f7](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/commit/00577f7c9664f6f21bcc1727dcf09e4c6f75507a) documents/tests the _chain of types_ and shows how we want to use `allTypes` method

- I am still relatively satisfied with 00577f7
   - e.g. there are no "static" methods - those are instance methods on `Type.getEigentype()`
- the only problem is the "duality of methods from Any"
- and I believe it is sufficiently solved by saying that:
   - each method found on `Any` has `self` argument defaulted to the receiver
   - but it can be changed by `self=whatever`
- at the end this sounds like a consistent set of rules

Author: I have simplified the Method resolution specs in 5f6fdaa71cccb998f17f311e68d711c21d45d46a according to your suggestions, which makes sense:
1. Determine type of the `Receiver`
2. Symbol lookup on the determined type.

   - 2.1. We are looking for either a _static method_ or an _instance method_
     defined on `Receiver` type.
   - 2.2. If `symbol` is defined on `Receiver`, with or without `self` argument,
     select it and stop.
   - 2.3. If `symbol` is defined on `Any`, with or without `self` argument,
     select it and stop.
   - 2.4. Otherwise, raise `No_Such_Method` panic and stop.

3. **`Receiver` is a value (instance / atom):**

   - 3.1. We are looking for an _instance method_.
   - 3.2. If `symbol` is defined on `Receiver` with `self` argument, select it
     and stop.
   - 3.3. If `symbol` is defined on `Any` with `self` argument, select it and
     stop.
   - 3.4. Otherwise, raise `No_Such_Method` panic and stop.

4. **`Receiver` is a module. We are looking for a _module method_:**

   - 4.1. Module methods are not allowed to be defined with `self` argument.
   - 4.2. If `symbol` is defined in `Receiver` module, select it and stop.
   - 4.3. Otherwise, raise `No_Such_Method` panic and stop.

5. **`Receiver` is a polyglot object. A polyglot object can be:**

>    - 5.1. A Java class, imported by `polyglot java import ...` statement.

Reviewer: - handling polyglot is very different special case.
- as Ara puts it: it is a [generic variadic syntax](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/27310706afc8dc7a5a52d1c758e08efcab62d3d8/docs/polyglot/polyglot-bindings.md?plain=1#L60) 
   - e.g. collect all arguments and send them all into `invokeMember`
- there are no pools to "lookup" methods at
- e.g. just reference the other document than trying to describe the dispatch here

Author: Done in 5f6fdaa71cccb998f17f311e68d711c21d45d46a

   - 5.2. Java object instance, created by `Java_Class.new ...` expression.
   - 5.3. Javascript, Python, or any other allowed foreign language object
     returned by a foreign method call.
   - 5.4. Searching for `symbol` on such a `Receiver` is subject to the rules of
     the [polyglot Interoperability](../polyglot/README.md) chapter.

6. **There is no `Receiver`:**

>    - 6.1. We are looking either for a _module method_ or for a variable in the

Reviewer: - Not really a "method resolution"
- this is only influenced by "lexical scope" with all the defined symbols being available
- this should even yield an error during "compile time" - e.g. before executing any code

Author: In 5f6fdaa71cccb998f17f311e68d711c21d45d46a, it is clear that when there is no `Receiver`, it is no longer considered _method resolution_, but rather a _lexical scope symbol lookup_.

- 1.1. If `Receiver` is type, the result will be _eigen type_
- 1.2. If `Receiver` is a value (instance / atom), the result will be the _type
  of the value_
- 1.3. If `Receiver` is a module, the result will be the _associated type_ for
  the module
- 1.4. If `Receiver` is a polyglot object, method resolution and invocation will
  be handled according to the [polyglot interoperability](../polyglot/README.md)
  rules.
  - Polyglot object can be, for example:
    - A Java class, imported by `polyglot java import ...` statement.
    - Java object instance, created by `Java_Class.new ...` expression.
    - Javascript, Python, or any other allowed foreign language object returned
      by a foreign method call.
    - Refer to [polyglot readme](../polyglot/README.md) for more details.
- 1.5. If there is no `Receiver`, we are just looking for a variable in the
  current lexical scope or any parent scopes. See
  [Lexical scope lookup](#lexical-scope-lookup).

2. **Look up symbol in the symbol table of the determined type:**

- 2.1. Lookup the `symbol` in the Receiver's type and all its parent types.
- 2.2. If it is found, continue to 3.
- 2.3. If it is not found, continue to 4.

> 3. **Invoke the method with defaulted self**:

Reviewer: If there is no named argument `self=` specified, then we perform the invoke with self being set to receiver.

- 3.1. `symbol` is a method in Receiver's type (or its parent type) symbol
  table.
- 3.2. Such method is treated as if it's first parameter is named `self` and has
  the default value of `Receiver`.

> - 3.3. The call site can specify named `self` argument

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 3.3. The call site cannot specify named `self` argument
```

> 4. **Static invocation without bound self**:

Reviewer: If the first argument of the method is `self=`, then it is static method invocation syntax.

> - 4.1. Method was not found on Receiver's type, or its parent type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 4.1. If the first argument of the method is self=, then it is static method invocation syntax.
   - specifying `self=` argument as second or later is compile time error
```

- 4.2. Try to lookup the method on the `Receiver` itself
- 4.3. If no method is found, raise `No_Such_Method` panic and stop.
- 4.4. If a method is found, treat it as if it's first parameter is named `self`

>   and has no default value.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and has value specifying by the explicit `self=` argument
```

precedence over _instance methods_ defined on `Any`. Thus a module serves
primarily as a _container for module (static) methods_.

> ## Method invocation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Method Invocation
```

**Terminology**:

- **eigen type** of a type `My_Type` is a type of type, usually written as
  `My_Type.type`.
  - Every type has an eigen type.
  - Eigen type of an eigen type is itself.
  - There is always exactly one instance of each eigen type, that is, eigen type
    is singleton itself.
  - The name is motivated by an
    [eigen value of a matrix](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Eigenvalues_and_eigenvectors).
- **associated type** of a module `My_Module` is a type for the module
  - It is basically an eigen type for a module.

> - **builtin type** is a type annotated with `@Builtin_Type`.

Reviewer: - relevant question is: [What is a benefit of builtin type](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/issues/13664#issuecomment-3266102569)?
- unless I am mistaken we could easily run without `@Builtin_Type`
- I mean builtin type - not `@Builtin_Method` - that's still very much needed
- on and on, I'd rather leave _builtin types_ out of the method resolution document
- they don't have any special behavior to discuss - or do they?

Author: > relevant question is: https://github.com/enso-org/enso/issues/13664#issuecomment-3266102569?

That is indeed very relevant.

> they don't have any special behavior to discuss - or do they?

The only reason why I am mentioning builtin types in terminology section here, is because only builtin types may have different inheritance hierarchy. An example is later mentioned in [parent type](https://github.com/enso-org/enso/blob/41914f42ec66ae4b64c8b10215b79619e8bce9e3/docs/types/dynamic-dispatch.md#L189-L191).

- 1.4. If `Receiver` is a polyglot object, method resolution and invocation will
  be handled according to the [polyglot interoperability](../polyglot/README.md)
  rules.
  - Polyglot object can be, for example:
    - A Java class, imported by `polyglot java import ...` statement.
    - Java object instance, created by `Java_Class.new ...` expression.
    - Javascript, Python, or any other allowed foreign language object returned
      by a foreign method call.
    - Refer to [polyglot readme](../polyglot/README.md) for more details.
- 1.5. If there is no `Receiver`, we are just looking for a variable in the
  current lexical scope or any parent scopes. See
  [Lexical scope lookup](#lexical-scope-lookup).

2. **Look up symbol in the symbol table of the determined type:**

- 2.1. Lookup the `symbol` in the Receiver's type and all its parent types.
- 2.2. If it is found, continue to 3.
- 2.3. If it is not found, continue to 4.

3. **Invoke the method with defaulted self**:

- 3.1. `symbol` is a method in Receiver's type (or its parent type) symbol
  table.
- 3.2. Such method is treated as if it's first parameter is named `self` and has
  the default value of `Receiver`.

> - 3.3. The call site can specify named `self` argument

Reviewer: Super. Section three is short and exact.

4. **Static invocation without bound self**:

- 4.1. Method was not found on Receiver's type, or its parent type.
- 4.2. Try to lookup the method on the `Receiver` itself
- 4.3. If no method is found, raise `No_Such_Method` panic and stop.
- 4.4. If a method is found, treat it as if it's first parameter is named `self`

>   and has no default value.

Reviewer: OK too.

  `symbol` is defined in any of the modules, select it and stop.
- Raise `Name_Not_Found` panic and stop.

## Examples

```
@Builtin_Type
type Any
    to_text self = "???"

type My_Type
    Cons
    method self x = x + 1

obj = My_Type.Cons
```

> ### Example (a)

Reviewer: - Instead of examples in the documentation, put them into a test case and link from here. Maybe?
- Documentation full of examples has only one future: to get outdated.

Author: Valid point. I will definitely add such tests in https://github.com/enso-org/enso/pull/13962. This whole documentation is, in fact, the **desired behavior** that is being implemented in #13962.

Author: Added as a checklist point in #13962.
